# MAME Config Generator LUA Plugin

This is a LUA plugin for [MAME](https://www.mamedev.org/). It automatically generates input configuration files (`.cfg`) for MAME games.

## Installation and Usage

1. Download the `configgenerator.zip` from the latest [Release](https://github.com/Jakobud/configgenerator/releases)
2. Unzip the file
3. Copy the `configgenerator` directory to the `mame/plugins/` directory:
   - Example: `/path/to/mame/plugins/configgenerator/`
4. Enable the plugin in one of the follow ways:
   - Enable `Config Generator` in MAME's Plugin Menu
   - Add `configgenerator` to the `plugin` option in `mame.ini`
   - Run MAME with the command-line option `-plugin configgenerator`

## Doesn't MAME already generate .cfg files?

MAME generates a `.cfg` file in the `cfg` directory for a game when the game exits. While these are important and useful, they do not include input or dipswitch configurations that are using the system default values.

For example if you run `pacman` using default MAME controls, this is the `pacman.cfg` that is generated:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!-- This file is autogenerated; comments and unknown tags will be stripped -->
<mameconfig version="10">
    <system name="pacman" />
</mameconfig>
```

Because all the input controls and dipswitches are set to default values, it doesn't include them in the configuration file.

This plugin will generate a similar `.cfg` but will include all input controls and dipswitches values, whether or not they are set to default values. It will even (optionally) include comments. Here is the generated `pacman.cfg`:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!-- This file is autogenerated; comments and unknown tags will be stripped -->
<mameconfig version="10">
    <system name="pacman">
        <input>
            <!-- Coinage -->
            <port tag=":DSW1" type="DIPSWITCH" mask="3" defvalue="1" value="1"></port>

            <!-- Bonus Life -->
            <port tag=":DSW1" type="DIPSWITCH" mask="48" defvalue="0" value="0"></port>

            <!-- P1 Left -->
            <port tag=":IN0" type="P1_JOYSTICK_LEFT" mask="2" defvalue="2">
                <newseq type="standard">
                    KEYCODE_LEFT
                </newseq>
            </port>

            <!-- P1 Down -->
            <port tag=":IN0" type="P1_JOYSTICK_DOWN" mask="8" defvalue="8">
                <newseq type="standard">
                    KEYCODE_DOWN
                </newseq>
            </port>

            <!-- P1 Up -->
            <port tag=":IN0" type="P1_JOYSTICK_UP" mask="1" defvalue="1">
                <newseq type="standard">
                    KEYCODE_UP
                </newseq>
            </port>
etc...
```

## Why is this useful?

This plugin is useful mostly for 3rd party MAME tools that would benefit from automatically generated config files.

For MAME, it is notoriously difficult to set consistent input controls for large numbers of games at the same time, which is why invaluable tools like [CFG Magician](https://emumovies.com/files/file/601-cfg-magician/) were created long ago. CFG Magician however relies on generated configuration files for each game in order to make new ones with new input assignments. There are old configuration files for CFG Magician floating around but if rom drivers ever change or new roms are added, this plugin makes it easy to generate new config files.

## CTRLR files and MAME command-line options

You can alter MAME's input control assignements using `ctrlr` files or pointing to different config files using command-line options like `-cfg_directory` or `-ctrlrpath`. The great thing about this plugin is that it will take these into account when generating the config files. Whatever input assignments you see in MAME is what it will generate.

## Settings

This plugin includes a `settings.json` with various values you can adjust

```json
{
  "comments": true,
  "output": "cfg_generated",
  "run_at_start": false,
  "run_at_end": true,
  "overwrite": true
}
```

- `comments` - _boolean_

  - Whether or not to include control input comments in the config file
  - Default: `true`

  ```xml
  <!-- P1 High Kick -->
  <port tag=":IN0" type="P1_BUTTON3" mask="64" defvalue="64">
      <newseq type="standard">
          KEYCODE_ALT
      </newseq>
  </port>
  ```

- `output` - _string_

  - Output directory for the generated `.cfg` files, relative to the MAME directory
  - Default: `cfg_generated`
  - You could change this to `cfg` and the plugin would overwrite MAME's own generated config files but this would not be recommended as MAME also includes bookkeeping statistics and debugger information in it's config files.

- `run_at_start` - _boolean_

  - Whether or not to generate the config file when a game loads (emulation starts)
  - Default: `false`

- `run_at_end` - _boolean_

  - Whether or not to generate the config file you exit a game (emulation ends)
  - Default: `true`

- `overwrite` - _boolean_
  - Whether or not to overwrite existing `.cfg` files
  - Default: `true`
